Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is part
two of our mini-series on queens.
In part one we looked at the tragic life
of Anne Boleyn, the wife of Henry VIII.
And in part three it’s going to
be Catherine the Great of Russia.
I should say that if you haven’t
listened to the one on Anne Boleyn
yet, I would advise you to listen
to that one before this one.
Anne Boleyn was Elizabeth the First's
mother, so an understanding of her
story will help you better understand
the story of Elizabeth, and give you
an indication of why, perhaps, she took
some of the decisions she did, decisions
that would mean she was able to truly
manage to control her own destiny and
legacy, in a way her mother wasn't.
So, let’s get right into it and learn
about Elizabeth I, The Virgin Queen.
There's an expression in modern
English called "broken home".
It tends to mean an unstable and
unhappy childhood, often with
separated or fighting parents.
There is little evidence that this
expression existed in the 16th
century, but let me introduce you
to a situation that would certainly
meet our modern description.
Imagine your mother was the queen of
England, but when you were only two
years old she was publicly executed
on the orders of your father.
You were then disowned by your
father, along with your half-sister
from his first marriage.
And when your father had another
child with his new wife, a boy no
less, you became even less important.
This was the situation that
young Elizabeth found herself in.
A broken home is perhaps even a euphemism
for the early years of Elizabeth I.
Despite being disowned and having
little chance of ever sitting
on the throne, she was still the
king’s daughter and had an extremely
privileged childhood and education.
She learnt mathematics, poetry,
rhetoric, and music, and was
fluent in five languages.
From an early age, it was clear that
this young girl was a cut above the
rest, she was something special.
She was tall, she had bright red
hair, and was exceptionally clever.
And this intelligence and wit would
come in very handy, as she had to be
constantly on guard, looking out for
men plotting and conspiring against her.
This all started from a young age.
When she was only 14 years
old, her father, Henry VIII
died, passing the throne to her
9-year-old half-brother, Edward.
Clearly, a 9-year-old can’t exactly rule
for himself, so his government was left in
the hands of elder noblemen and officials.
And, as you might imagine, before
Henry had even taken his last breath,
there were plenty of plots and schemes
about how to manipulate and control
not only his son and heir, but his
other children, Mary and Elizabeth.
At this point, the young Elizabeth
was sent to live with Henry’s 6th
and final wife, Catherine Parr,
who had married a man called Thomas
Seymour after Henry had died.
If the surname “Seymour” rings a
bell, Thomas Seymour’s sister was Jane
Seymour, who was Henry VIII’s third wife.
Now, I know there are a lot of names
and relationships here, so don’t
worry if it’s a bit tricky to follow.
The important point is that Thomas
Seymour was not good news for Elizabeth.
Believing it would get him closer to
the crown, Seymour begun to make sexual
advances towards the teenage girl.
He was 25 years older than her,
and were he to be alive today, he
would certainly be called a sexual
predator and thrown into prison.
Elizabeth’s servant reported that
Seymour would come to Elizabeth’s
bedroom every morning before the
young princess was even dressed.
He would verbally abuse her,
and it’s thought he probably
sexually abused her as well.
It’s believed that Catherine was well
aware of her husband’s behaviour but
initially did nothing to stop it.
In fact, in one horrible episode
she actually joined in this
behaviour with him, with the couple
reportedly tearing the young girl’s
dress to pieces to humiliate her.
It was not until Catherine found
Elizabeth in Seymour’s arms that she
reacted and sent the young girl away
from her palace never to see her again.
Around a year after Elizabeth had been
sent away, Catherine died, leaving all
her riches to Seymour and making him one
of the wealthiest men in the country.
So, to recap, Henry VIII dies, his
surviving wife, Catherine, marries this
horrible abusive man, Thomas Seymour,
who is planning to marry Elizabeth.
Then Catherine dies, leaving her
fortune to evil Thomas Seymour.
Seymour now has the chance to carry out
his plan to marry Elizabeth and gain
influence over his nephew, Elizabeth’s
half-brother, the young king Edward VI.
Some say he actually planned
to kill or marry off his nephew
and put Elizabeth on the throne.
In any case, he didn’t
have the chance to do it.
He was arrested for treason, by his own
brother no less, and eventually executed.
Anyone involved with Seymour also
came under suspicion, and this,
naturally included Elizabeth.
She was central to Seymour’s plan,
even though there is no evidence that
she wanted anything to do with him.
She was accused of helping him and of
having a sexual relationship with him.
She was interrogated for weeks, with
attempts to bully a confession out of her.
However, at just 15 years old, Elizabeth
outsmarted the council and denied all
the charges, proving herself to be
wise, confident, careful, and able
to look out for herself in this world
of manipulative and conspiring men.
But this would only be the start
of her lifelong battle against
men plotting to get rid of her.
In 1553, her half-brother, King
Edward VI, died, aged only 15.
In his will just days before he died, he
had named his Protestant cousin, Lady Jane
Grey, as his heir, most likely because
he didn’t want his Catholic half-sister,
Mary, to take control of the country.
Well, the throne did pass to Lady
Jane Grey, but for a measly 9
days, before the tide turned and
Catholic Mary seized the throne.
Mary was determined to undo her
father’s religious reforms and
return the country to Catholicism.
Her father, Henry VIII, remember,
had broken with Rome and declared
himself to be head of the Church
of England, the Protestant Church
of England, so that he could marry
Anne Boleyn, Elizabeth’s mother.
Mary was a devout Catholic.
Protestants who refused to convert to
Catholicism were burned at the stake,
earning Mary the nickname of Bloody Mary.
Yes, if you’re wondering, the drink with
tomato juice and vodka is named after
this religious zealot of an English queen.
Elizabeth, who was born a Protestant,
would find herself caught up in this
religious turmoil, with Mary even
locking up her own sister in the
Tower of London, supposedly believing
that she was plotting against her.
It was two months before Elizabeth would
be released from the Tower, and after this
she was sent off to be kept under what was
essentially house arrest for another year.
Now, to skip forward a little bit,
Bloody Queen Mary died childless in 1558.
She had failed to produce an heir, so the
crown passed to the 25-year-old Elizabeth,
turning her into Queen Elizabeth I.
Now, I know it has taken us a while
to get to the bit where Elizabeth
actually becomes Queen Elizabeth,
but the back story is important.
Think about what she has gone
through so far, and it might help
you understand the actions she'll
take when she's on the throne.
She was crowned in a coronation ceremony
that was nothing short of a spectacle.
She paraded through the streets in
a small golden carriage as thousands
of excited Londoners tried to
catch a glimpse of the new Queen.
But not everyone was so
excited over the coronation.
Remember, there are still vast
religious divisions, and Catholics
were angry at the idea of a
protestant being back on the throne.
It was not only her religion
that made Elizabeth problematic.
She was an unmarried, childless,
female monarch, a very unusual
combination at the time.
So, there was an exceeding amount of
pressure on her to do something about it.
And what that meant, in practical
terms, was first to find a husband.
Not just so that he would do the
important job of producing a male heir
with her, but also so that he could
help her make the tricky decisions
that a monarch needed to take.
Women at this time were not considered
to be intellectually capable of making
these kinds of tough decisions, so a
queen needed to find a man to help her.
As you might imagine, for an incredibly
intelligent and independent woman, one who
had already proved that she was perfectly
capable of looking after herself,
this must have been a tricky pill to
swallow, a difficult reality to accept.
And indeed, Elizabeth didn't accept it.
In fact, she had resolved never to
marry, even taking a pledge as an
8-year-old to never take a husband.
She would keep this pledge
for her entire adult life.
But how could she sell this
to the public, a public that
expected her to take a husband?
Well, as queen, she transformed her
image and public persona from ordinary
woman into a god-like figure, a deity.
She announced that she would live
and die a virgin, earning her
the nickname “The Virgin Queen”.
It was actually a very clever move,
as it placed her in a completely
different category to a normal
queen, who would constantly be
bombarded with marriage requests.
If people thought of her more like a
god than a queen, well this gave her the
perfect excuse to not take a husband.
So, why was this, why was she
so opposed to getting married?
Well, perhaps it was just her character.
Perhaps she had seen the devastating
effect of marriage on her own mother, Anne
Boleyn, as well as the fate of the other
five women who had married her father.
Perhaps it was the horrific
abuse she likely suffered at
the hands of Thomas Seymour.
Perhaps she was simply disgusted by all
of the scheming and plotting men at court.
Perhaps she thought that being
independent was, counterintuitively,
her best chance at surviving.
Whichever it was, one thing is
undeniable: this was a man’s world
where women were second-class citizens.
It was not long, though, before Elizabeth
had much bigger problems than fending
off the advances of male suitors,
because in 1562 she fell very ill.
Initially, she and her court believed it
was just a cold but she grew weaker and
weaker and soon she could not even talk.
It became obvious that the queen had
Smallpox, the deadly disease that killed
between 20-30% of everyone it infected.
Everyone believed
Elizabeth was about to die.
Thankfully, though, she did not and she
amazed everyone by making a full recovery.
The disease would, however, leave
her with terrible scarring on her
face, which she would cover up with a
permanent thick layer of white makeup.
She tried to take full advantage
of her escape from death,
describing it as evidence that
God supported and protected her.
But it wasn’t taken this way by all,
with her critics suggesting that this
only proved her to be a weak and sickly
woman who desperately needed a husband.
And the pressure continued to
grow, with her advisors continually
putting forward potential matches.
But Elizabeth rejected them all.
Now, it is, of course, possible
that there was another reason that
Elizabeth was not interested in any
of her advisor’s suggested husbands.
Perhaps it was because she had
a love interest of her own.
One man above all others was
believed to be her lover.
His name was Robert Dudley,
the Earl of Leicester.
The pair had known each other since
childhood and were almost inseparable.
The Queen called him her ‘Sweet Robin’
and gave him many gifts, riches and
powerful positions within her government.
Over the years, many rumours came
out about the pair having had
multiple illegitimate children, who
were subsequently sent abroad to
protect the Queen’s virginal image.
Whether the rumours were true or
not, they clearly show that not
everyone was convinced by the
Queen’s claims she was a virgin.
And Dudley certainly seemed to start to
think that he was the one for Elizabeth,
he was the man she was waiting for.
He planned a lavish proposal to
her in an extravagant 19-day-event,
featuring water fountains, musical
performances, plays and fireworks.
The highlight of the entire event was
planned to be a play, during which Dudley
would dramatically propose to the queen.
But Elizabeth had other plans.
When she got wind of what was about
to happen, she refused to let the
performance start, and Dudley’s
plan was thwarted, it was stopped.
The Virgin Queen was not planning
on breaking the promise she had
made to herself as an 8-year-old.
She would remain single, she did not
need a man to tell her what to do.
And all around, the threats were growing.
After all, the queen’s ticking
biological clock and refusal to take
a husband was problematic for the
succession of the British crown.
With no children, who would the
throne pass to after her death?
For some, they sensed opportunity.
In 1571 an Italian banker, Roberto
Ridolfi conspired with Elizabeth’s
Catholic cousin, Mary, Queen of Scots.
The pair plotted to gather an army from
Spain and then kill Elizabeth so Mary
could take the English throne, and the
country could be returned to Catholicism.
But while there were plenty of
plotting men around, Elizabeth
also had a network of spies, she
knew that knowledge was power.
Her chief spymaster was a man named Sir
Francis Walsingham, and he managed to
discover this plot, a plot which would
go down in history as The Ridolfi Plot.
Elizabeth ordered the executions of
everyone involved, but she decided
to spare her Scottish cousin, Mary.
Her mercy, however, would not go rewarded.
In 1586, 15 years later, Mary,
Queen of Scots began to plot again.
She had been sending coded
letters in beer barrels to an
Englishman named Anthony Babington.
The plan was much the same as the
Ridolfi Plot, with Spain to invade,
kill Elizabeth, place Mary on the
throne and restore Catholicism.
But the conspirators, including Mary, did
not realise that their letters were yet
again being intercepted by Elizabeth’s
trusted spymaster, Sir Francis Walsingham.
This time, Elizabeth wouldn’t be so
forgiving towards her rebellious cousin.
Mary was caught, held in the Tower of
London, and beheaded the following year.
But even with her rival to the
north now dealt with, there was
little peace for this English queen.
There was increasing rivalry with
Spain, with Philip II expressing
his desire to attack England and
restore Catholicism to the country,
which would clearly require removing
the Protestant monarch, Elizabeth,
and replacing her with a Catholic.
This all came to a head in 1588,
just a year after Elizabeth had
got rid of the “Mary” threat.
On the south coast of England, the
troops were preparing for the arrival of
the Spanish armada, the Spanish fleet.
On the 19th of August 1588,
Elizabeth went to visit them, making
a rousing speech to her soldiers.
She declared, ‘I know I have the
body of a weak and feeble woman;
but I have the heart and stomach of
a king, and a king of England too’.
The English were looking down the
barrel of a potentially huge defeat.
The Spanish forces were far greater
in number, but there were terrible
storms on their route north.
There was a battle, the battle of
Gravelines, and the Spanish were
pushed away from the coast, forced to
retreat back to Spain via the North
Sea, and the threat was averted.
This victory, although it was certainly
helped by bad weather and storms, brought
Elizabeth’s popularity to new heights, and
cemented her in the minds of the public
as the Queen who had seen off the Spanish.
And despite all of these domestic and
international threats, with cousins and
Spanish kings trying to kill her, the
Elizabethan era, as it has come to be
known, was a period of relative peace,
both domestically and internationally.
Yes, there were all of those people at
home and abroad who wanted her dead, but
compared to the years that came before
and after, it was remarkably peaceful.
And with this peace came an era of
unparalleled cultural development,
and the flourishing of the arts.
The Elizabethan era saw the plays of
William Shakespeare, the explorations
of Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter
Raleigh, and huge development
in poetry, theatre and music.
It’s pretty amazing to think that in
the years before she was made queen,
the country was in the midst of bloody
religious wars, and then less than
forty years after her death the UK
experienced its most bloody civil
war and then the execution of a King.
And here, in the middle, came this
“Golden Age” of peace and tranquillity,
which the lady on the throne can
take a large amount of credit for.
So, she was an admirable woman, and
a strong and intelligent leader.
But she was, after all, human.
By 1597 she was 64 years old, an
impressive age at the time when the
average life expectancy was just 42.
That year, the French ambassador
wrote that the Queen looked aged,
with wrinkles and many missing teeth.
She also bore the scars of smallpox,
which she covered up with her thick
white makeup and her orange wig.
And many took her ageing face to be
a reminder of the fact she was now
too old to have a child but had still
not named an heir to the throne.
And she could not escape
time’s winged chariot.
On 24th March 1603, at the age of
69, without ever producing an heir or
naming her successor, she died, ending
the near 120 year-reign of the Tudors.
She was truly remarkable,
overcoming imprisonment, disease,
assassination attempts, war and
rebellion, to rule for 45 years.
This would have been impressive enough
as is, but to do that as an unmarried
woman in a world dominated by scheming
and unscrupulous men was even more so.
She has gone down in British history
as one of the most influential monarchs
of all time, seeing the country through
religious rivalries, domestic and
international conflict, and turning the
country from an infighting minor European
power into a fledgling imperial one.
She was also, compared to her mother,
Anne Boleyn, and even the subject of
the next episode, Catherine the Great,
the only one who really managed to
control her own image and write her own
story, defying her critics and leaving
an enormous legacy on the country.
When she was born, she was
a disappointment to her
father because of her gender.
The great irony was, despite this
“disappointing” gender, she was
far more intelligent, cunning,
and brave than her father.
This father, Henry VIII is remembered
as a selfish and nasty king.
His daughter, on the other hand, managed
to write her own story, define her own
path and ultimately be remembered as a
far more successful ruler than any man.
Ok then, that is it for today’s episode
on Elizabeth I, the Virgin Queen, part
two of this three-part miniseries.
Next up we’ll be talking
about Catherine The Great.
And if you missed it, part one was
on Elizabeth’s mother, Anne Boleyn.
As always I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
How much did you know about
the life of Elizabeth I?
Why do you think she never married?
Can you think of any parallels
between Elizabeth I and Elizabeth II?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.